---
title: "doublespeak: Northumberland County Council"
permalink: /wrote/Doublespeak
blurb: >
    The Council’s consultation report on education in west Northumberland, 
    published at the end of the stage-two consultation period, contained the 
    following emotive text: “Feedback from schools and the wider community in 
    the Haydon Bridge Partnership has not expressed a desire to return to the 
    3-tier system therefore this would be an unpopular and retrograde step.”
---
# doublespeak: Northumberland County Council

The Council’s consultation report on education in west Northumberland, 
published at the end of the stage-two consultation period, contained the 
following emotive text: “Feedback from schools and the wider community in the 
Haydon Bridge Partnership has not expressed a desire to return to the 3-tier 
system therefore this would be an unpopular and retrograde step.”

This is baffling at best, and at worst the most disgraceful skewing of a 
debate through subjective language. The schools in our part of the Haydon 
Bridge partnership are three-tier, so we cannot “return to the 3-tier system”. 
Three-tier therefore, by definition, cannot be a “retrograde step” and any 
consultation responses which opposed change are therefore testament to the 
*popularity* of three-tier, not its unpopularity.

<figure>
    <img src="/assets/pics/1984.jpeg" alt="1984" />
</figure>


At the end of the day, we know there have been problems at Haydon Bridge High 
School. However, our arguments against the stage-two proposals hold good 
against these statutory proposals: don’t rob Peter to pay Paul. **Don’t fix 
what’s broken by breaking what works**. Don’t compel unpopular change on some 
schools to “fix” another.

One is forced to conclude:

- the stage-two proposals were a feint to draw the sting of the community and 
exhaust their appetite to fight the Council’s ulterior aim, which was always 
two-tier
- someone has a gun to the Council’s head on this issue — Whitehall? the 
Regional Schools Commissioner? The Education and Skills Funding 
Agency? — there is no other explanation for the breakneck speed of the 
consultations in the face of massive public outcry, the statutory consultation 
lasting the statutory minimum period, and coinciding with a school holiday, 
which DfE identifies as not best practice

If the Council had avoided all the offensive “once-in-a-generation” rhetoric 
and simply stated the problems (money, population, Hadrian Learning Trust’s 
proposal, Bright Tribe and Haydon Bridge), then we would all have had a much 
more honest understanding of the position in which we find ourselves, and 
perhaps we could have worked together, rather than fighting tooth and nail.

As it is, the community is now in open revolt against the Council. This is the 
endgame of a decade-long political long con to foist two-tier education on 
that community which the Council purport to serve. Let the next local 
elections serve them their just deserts.
