---
title: "Reiver!"
permalink: /wrote/Reiver
blurb: >
    Many years ago, inspired by flocking algorithms, I made a Flash game based 
    on the Border Reivers. Try it now on your desktop, before Flash finally 
    dies completely.
---
# Reiver!

<object classid="clsid:d27cdb6e-ae6d-11cf-96b8-444553540000" codebase="http://fpdownload.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=8,0,0,0" width="650" height="600" id="reiverIso" align="middle">
<param name="allowScriptAccess" value="sameDomain" />
<param name="movie" value="reiverIso.swf" /><param name="quality" value="high" /><param name="bgcolor" value="#666666" /><embed src="reiverIso.swf" quality="high" bgcolor="#666666" width="650" height="600" name="reiverIso" align="middle" allowScriptAccess="sameDomain" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" pluginspage="http://www.macromedia.com/go/getflashplayer" />
</object>

## Ancient history: computer animation in the 1980s

In the 1980s, I saw a long documentary on computer animation on Channel4. It 
included many of the early Pixar short films (Luxo Jr, Tin Toy, Red's Dream, 
Nick Nack) together with extensive interviews with John Lasseter, founder of 
Pixar.

It also included a short section which described animating flocks of birds. 
This was based on the work of Craig Reynolds. The theory is that, while the 
motion of a flock of birds is fantastically complex, a bird's brain is not. A 
bird must therefore follow a few fairly simple rules in order to fly in a 
flock.

If one could approximate those rules mathematically, one could build a group 
of objects in a computer animation, and program them to follow thoese rules. 
This idea fascinated me, given the interest in chaos theory at the time.

Reynolds managed to formulate extremely simple rules, and coded them, 
animating what he called boids - objects in a procedural computer animation 
which follow their own rules, resulting in the emergent phenomenon of 
realistic flocking behaviour. The clip which I remember from the documentary 
is available here:

http://www.siggraph.org/education/materials/HyperGraph/animation/art_life/video/3cr.mov

## Feet in the past: a dabbler in history

As a result of a growing interest in the languages, literature, and history of 
north-western Europe, I studied Anglo-Saxon, Norse, and Celtic at university. 
While achieveing a modicum of success in the languages and literature, I 
seemed to have little aptitude for the history, though I enjoyed the subject 
matter greatly.

During the summer holidays, newly-purchased English Heritage membership grew 
my enthusiasm for the history of Britain, and, after our wedding, we moved out 
into rural (extremely rural) Northumberland. This is reiver country, and my 
brother, a fan of George MacDonald Fraser, pointed me towards Steel Bonnets.


## Curriculum Vitae: a frustrated web designer

As a textbook example of the dilettante in many fields, I was interested in 
computers as a child, then in print and design from around the age of 
seventeen. I ended up working as a web designer from the late 1990s - as a 
completely new discipline, my areas of interest happened to seem to qualify me 
for this line of work, though I am no great programmer, and certainly no great 
designer.

During my first paid job at a web design agency, I found out about Flash, a 
web animation tool. I persuaded the company to buy a copy of the software, and 
ended up doing work for several clients using it. This was my first real 
exposure to computer animation, having previously looked at traditional 3D 
computer animation a little while at college.

I continued using Flash over the years, as I changed jobs several times, and 
as Flash itself developed. In recent years, and in this current job, however, 
I had barely had cause to use it any more.


## e-Enablement Officer, or, How I Gave Up Working at Durham City Council and 
Learned to Love Working for Northumberland National Park Authority

In 2005, I was managing Durham City Council's web site, when a job came up at 
Northumberland National Park Authority. The job was fixed-term and paid less, 
but was much closer to home. More importantly to me, however, it represented a 
chance to work for an organization in whose aims I believed and was interested.

The job focused on delivering central government's e-government agenda, but 
after a few years, the external push in this area of work ceased, and my job 
was made permanent with a much broader remit: to develop new systems and 
solutions in ICT to help Northumberland National Park Authority achieve its 
aims.


## Reiver confluence

While walking the dog, I thought up the idea for a game which brought these 
various elements together: history, computer animation, the web, and 
Northumberland National Park. I envisaged a game in which one had to reive 
cattle and sheep, which would flock realistically. Some searching online 
pointed me towards the work in Flash of Simon Man, who graciously allowed me 
to use his flocking code as the basis of Reiver. Without his work, this game 
would not have been made.

I got a working example up and running, but then decided that I wanted to 
crack another technique I had always loved, that of isometric 3D. The work of 
Sulake in the early 2000s influenced my interest in this visual idiom. Having 
attempted to achieve a similar effect at the time with a colleague, I now 
looked to a book we had in the office on game design in Flash. The book had an 
excellent section on isometric 3D in Flash, and that set me on my way.


Final touches: why this is so hard

The hardest part of this process then occurred. I had a working isometric 
herding game, but it was very much a one-shot time-waster. I'd never really 
thought that this would not be enough to make a game in and of itself. I 
sought a lot of advice from varied sources as to how to change this one-level 
curiosity into a fully-fledged game - colleagues in this and other National 
Parks, family, and former colleagues from the private sector. Thanks 
throughout this endeavour are due to Steve at Presence Multimedia, former 
colleague at The Web Works, and Dave and Matt at Mere Mortals (at the time), 
formerly of Zebra and here at NNPA respectively.

In the end, one just has to think about it long enough, and something will 
occur, hopefully something extremely simple, and so it proved in this case. 
Pressure of time was added by gathering dusk, and levels were added by 
increasing flocks, reduced time, and larger buildings to raid.


## That was MY idea!

During the later stages of development of the game, Matt told me that Red Dead 
Redemption had stolen my thunder. If one 
of the greatest games of 2010 thought that flocking behaviour and herding made 
a great game, then who am I to argue? That various gamers evidently hate this 
part of the game is of only incidental importance.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/kfwVc2uVygg" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
