---
title: "We Say No"
permalink: /wrote/WeSayNo
twitpic: https://tom.chadw.in/assets/pics/TomSquare.jpg
description: >
    Northumberland County Council, you represent us. Your Councillors are elected 
    by us, and your budgets come from our purses. To you, and to this whole 
    exercise, we say no.
---
# We say no

Northumberland County Council, you represent us. Your Councillors are elected 
by us, and your budgets come from our purses. To you, and to this whole 
exercise, we say no.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/NvJ1BiBhDvs" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

We’re not against change. I have no axe to grind on two-tier versus 
three-tier. We can agree on change together. That’s what consultation means. 
That’s what consultation is. At least, that’s what consultation should be.

But your false consultation is unacceptable. You have used our money to 
propose closing our successful and dearly loved school. No. Enough. This stops 
now. We say no.

You have not worked with us — you have sprung this on us. You have not 
followed DfE guidance on the closure of rural schools. That guidance requires 
you to ensure that closure of our school is “clearly in the best interests of 
educational provision in the area”. You offer no evidence for this. We say no.

You appear to be representing not us, but Hadrian Learning Trust. These 
proposals work to the Trust’s advantage, in some cases facilitating the 
changes they want, and giving them a monopoly over secondary education in our 
area. They are not your constituents. We are. And we say no.

I am told you held a closed meeting with the Roman Catholic Diocese of Hexham 
and Newcastle, telling them that they must accept option A. I am told that 
Governors of St Joseph’s Middle School were then told to accept option A 
against the strongly-expressed wish of some of them not to do so. If your 
consultation results in a Church intimidating its own clergy, dare I venture 
that perhaps you’re doing it wrong?

This is not consultation. Open the doors. You know as well as us that a closed 
meeting has no place in a consultation. We say no.

Your staff tell us that you have been challenged to solve the issue of 
“surplus places”. Why? When a school is viable, what is wrong with surplus 
places? When a school is successful, what is wrong with surplus places? You 
say it’s not about bricks and mortar, but that’s all these surplus places are: 
our schools are not employing teachers for any surplus places.

What is wrong with surplus places?

I don’t want an answer from you. I want that to be your response to Whitehall: 
“What is wrong with surplus places?”

You work for us. That is your job. Northumberland is the most sparsely 
populated county in England, and west Northumberland is one of its sparsest 
regions. One size does not fit all, and Whitehall’s size does not come within 
a country mile of fitting us.

We want these schools. We pay for these schools. It is our choice. We say no.

Our Parish Councils represent us. Our National Park Authority represents us. 
They say no. And we say no.

You represent us. You work for us.

We. Say. No.

<em>Submitted in response to Northumberland County Council consultation on 
schools in west Northumberland</em>
