---
title: "A walk without Max"
permalink: /wrote/AWalkWithoutMax
twitpic: https://tom.chadw.in/assets/pics/Max.jpg
description: >
    My less than cartographic unsuccessful entry to @pinakographos's 
    #MonoCarto competition
---

# A walk without Max

Walking further out of town on the road where I work, you climb a hill to some 
woods. You can avoid the main road and find more interesting ways to get 
there, but my walk without Max today only really started after the climb. 
Limited lunch time meant we used to drive up each day, until my guilt at 
unnecessary driving pushed us to alternative routes, and this walk was 
consigned to our past together.

An unprepossessing start, parking in a muddy narrow layby, and tiptoeing 
nervously along a short stretch of fast rural road with no pavement, leads to 
a wide track. Straight as an arrow, it runs at right-angles to the road, into 
the forest. At the junction is a gloriously overgrown cottage, with improbable 
bamboo hedge.

I’ve never liked forests much. The trees obscure the land and the sun, and 
one’s horizon is shortened. Pragmatism won the day, though, as tree cover has 
its benefits in the English climate. Max was black and tan, so as well as 
protection from inevitable rain, some shade was also welcome on our summer 
walks.

While the wide track marches on into the distance, various openings in the 
stone wall to the right grant access into the forest itself. One can pick out 
any number of routes, but the functionally redundant parallel course to the 
track always suited us best.

Where this almost-path rejoins the main track, a wider forest path slopes down 
to the right. Taking various measures to avoid incursions of water, one 
passes what I can only imagine are four redwoods. What these giants are doing 
among this otherwise commonplace English plantation is a mystery, and a 
beguiling one.

The path narrows as it skirts the private grounds of the large house at the 
heart of the woods, and then slopes further downhill. This path seems 
ancient – a wide holloway, again very straight, ending at a tiny stream.

I paused here, as here is compensation for the lack of view so far. Through a 
fence is open countryside, of the most beautiful rolling English kind. Max and 
I would always pause here, I to smile as my heart was lifted by the view, he 
impatiently. I never found out what horizon was revealed, and this view 
remains to this day precious to me, as a shared memory with him, silent and 
content. Today it’s just me.

Across the stream, the path flattens out, as it gently curves round to the 
left. This is more traditional forest pathwork, not the ageless sunken path we 
just descended. But to the right, a fork slopes sharply down.

We must have walked on past this fork hundreds of times, but one day, taking a 
break from over-cheerful enthusiasm from a software trainer, we turned right. 
The gradient rapidly increasing, the path became narrower and narrower, 
steeper and rougher, descending a conifer-root stairway, and nearly meriting 
the sit-and-slide approach.

As a younger man with a young mongrel, evidently largely collie, I scampered 
down this path. For years after, I couldn’t find it again. But three years 
ago, Max and I being older and more nervous, the ground slippery with falling 
rain, and with my nine-month-old son strapped to my chest, the precipitous 
nature of this descent was all too apparent.

I wasn’t going to turn back, though. Max and I had not been here for maybe ten 
years, and I wanted him to see it again. Sentimental thoughts of sharing it 
with my son, and even of this being a boys’ trip out, made me slither down.

My wife and I do everything together, with our family. These weekday lunchtime 
walks with Max were my time without her, without talk. Max and I would cover 
the ground, and see where our journey took us. I wonder if one day I’ll take 
my daughter here. She’d love it, but life gets in the way, and there is a 
little part of me that wants to keep this walk to myself. Me and Max. Today 
it’s just me.

The worst of the sheer path negotiated, this break from IT training yielded 
the most amazing surprise. An unexpected river, with yellow sandstone cliffs, 
and a sandbank shore in the bend. This felt like our own discovery. Today was 
only the third time I’ve ever been there, and it still takes my breath away. I 
jumped onto an island stone to be surrounded by the flow, and saw a tiny fish 
dart away.

Water makes me think of my dad. He was in love with the sea, but moderated his 
passion to rivers and canals in order to devise family holidays my mum would 
not flat-out refuse to join out of terror. Today would have been his 89th 
birthday. I had planned to go down to the abbey to sit for a moment in my 
perplexed atheism and remember his faith and love of church music. This felt 
more like common ground.

Back up—climbing easier than descending—I rejoined the long left-hand bend of 
the main path. Each of the three times I’ve done this walk, this long section 
has tested my mettle. I’ve no map (ironically). I don’t want a map. The first 
time, I wanted to see where paths took me, and each subsequent time, each 
separated by years, I long to see whether something in my sense of direction 
keeps me right.

Though devoid of landscape, nature entertains me today: a squirrel, a robin, 
and hundreds of thousands of wood ants and their anthills half my height are 
the distraction I need to settle my nerves.

Eventually, my faith is paid off. The continued gentle curve to the left felt 
like the right direction, and rather splendidly here we are, at the far end of 
that first arrow-straight track. Intriguingly it’s a crossroads. I’m not sure 
I can ever foresee an occasion when I’ll have the time to go straight on or 
turn right. Left it is.

I’ve been worrying about my age and health a little recently, for the first 
time. Being closer to fifty than forty, coupled with an increased rate of 
consumption of my personal vices (fat, salt, chocolate, and alcohol) has led 
to a feeling of slowing down. I’ve become aware in the last couple of weeks 
that I now make a noise when bending over, straightening up, or standing up 
out of a chair. I think I’m safe finally to identify as middle-aged.

For years and years, I defined male middle age as “that quality which compels 
a man to describe the death of former pets to younger women and girls”. This 
walk without Max confirms it.

To combat my lack of condition, I pick up the pace. I’ve always run up and 
down stairs, and had also become upset to realize that I’d unthinkingly 
stopped. So, the pace is upped when I can, and while the drink will remain, 
perhaps I can stave off the inevitable.

A little way along this unwavering mile, the manmade glory of this walk rears 
up to the left. A magnificence of Scots baronial has crossed the border. How 
can a house need so many chimneys, and so tall? And who doesn’t love a turret? 
Presumably this is the house whose owner planted the redwoods on the far side 
of the grounds.

Pound back to the main road. Turn right down the hill. While Max and I would 
by now be in the car, both drivers and walkers are now granted the most 
magnificent view of this Northumberland market town. No castle, but an abbey 
and old gaol offset the white-elephant empty hospital and inevitable vast 
supermarket.

Nothing else remains. Nearly back at work, the far side of the road offers the 
steep muddy footpath which starts what became Max’s and my later walk 
together. Its close forest perspectives are occasionally interrupted by 
beautiful views of pasture, and intriguing cliffs and ponds possibly bear 
witness to historic quarrying.

This walk with Max was what told me he was dying. He was slowing down, and I 
wanted him to be able to walk on the flat. I also wanted him perhaps to 
revisit a walk of his youth, in the days when he and I got to know one 
another. We got out of the car, and he stood still. He stood still.

The vet told us he was in a great deal of pain. He was gone by the end of the 
week.

We have Tixall and Kinver now. But somehow I don’t want to take them on this 
walk. On this map without a map. My walk without Max.

<figure>
    <img src="/assets/pics/Max.jpg" alt="Max" />
</figure>
