---
title: "Returning to games"
permalink: /wrote/ReturningToGames
# twitpic: https://tom.chadw.in/assets/pics/Thursbitch.jpg
description: >
    Having skipped consoles, the kind gift of an 
    XBox shows me what's changed, and what's still 
    the same
---

# Returning to games

Viking Raiders was a long time ago. That wonderful, innocent age of gameplay 
alone, and writing games in Basic, is what gave me the career I have today. 
A few forays into PC gaming followed: Civilization, one of the Star Wars ones, 
Myst (completed), and Riven (incomplete) were followed by years of nothing, 
until a little phone gaming (well, really an extension of my middle-aged 
enthusiasm for pool by way of 8-Ball).

The gift from a very kind colleague of an XBox One opened the door a crack. 
Leaving others to their Roblox, I started out with Red Dead Redemption, 
which had intrigued me since finding out about it when it launched during 
my non-gaming years.

Red Dead Redemption is simply miraculous. It was my first experience of a 
game both vast in scale and minute in detail. The realism of the trackways 
through a turn-of-the-century Western landscape join with a tangible 
plot and rendering which is good enough to create a reality which compels.
I'm only at the start, but I could watch it for hours.

Red Dead Redemption is hardly suitable fayre for the brood, however. By 
chance, my youngest and I stumbled on Unravel. This game is a natural 
successor to Myst in its beautiful rendering, disguising simple physical 
gameplay. Four factors elevate it way beyond its precursor.

The visuals are simply beautiful: lush, detailed, small in scale but big 
in realization. The real-world physics remind me of the peerless Thrust. 
The complexity of the puzzles verges on the fiendish.

But everything is trumped by the profoundly evocative atmosphere. Scandi 
hygge pair with a gently compelling soundtrack to tell an achingly 
nostalgic story, almost melancholic in its depiction of past childhood.

So that's me, at least for the moment. I can't see myself wanting any other 
games until I've completed these two. While each has a sequel, only Red 
Dead 2 seems to have a decent reputation. So I think I'll be set for some 
time.
